Mobile and wireless network technology

7 types of networks and their use cases
Networks differ based on size, connectivity, coverage and design. This guide explores seven common types of
networks, including their benefits and use cases.
FEATURE
Deanna Darah, Associate Site Editor
A computer network is an interconnected system of devices, represented as network nodes, that
share information, data and resources among each other.
Depending on the network type, devices can be as simple as computers or smartphones that
connect into a network. Larger networks use devices like routers and switches to create the
underlying network infrastructure.
Not all networks are the same. There are several types of networks, each existing to support the
devices, size and location of the system. Networks also have differing levels of access and forms
of connectivity.
Below are seven common types of networks, along with their benefits and use cases.
1. Personal area network
9 Networking g
A personal area network (PAN) is the smallest and simplest type of network. PANs connect devices
within the range of an individual and are no larger than about 10 meters (m). Because PANs
operate in such limited areas of space, most are wireless and provide short-range connectivity with
infrared technology.
An example of a wireless PAN is when users connect Bluetooth devices, like wireless headsets, to a
smartphone or laptop. Although most PANs are wireless, wired PAN options exist, including USB.
PAN benefits
Portability. Most devices that connect in a PAN are small and can be easily transported.
Affordability. The ability to form a connection between two devices in a PAN without additional
wiring is generally less expensive compared to a wired network.
Reliability. PANs guarantee stable connectivity between devices, provided that the devices
remain within the 10 m range.
Security. PANs don't directly connect to larger networks, but rather to other devices connected
to larger networks. The security of a device in a PAN is contingent upon how secure the
intermediary device is within the larger overall network.
PAN use cases
PANs are configured so individual users can connect their devices within their personal vicinity. A
literal example of this is a body area network, in which a user physically wears connected devices.
Small home networks with computers, printers and other wireless devices are also considered
PANs.
Looking ahead, PANs could function as a key player in the world of futurology. Some networking
experts have predicted that PANs may be able to optimize and enable IoT systems in both offices
and homes.
A local area network (LAN) is a system where computers and other devices connect to each other
in one location. While PANs connect devices around an individual, the scope of a LAN can range
from a few meters in a home to hundreds of meters in a large company office. The network
topology determines how devices in LANs interconnect.
LANs use both wired and wireless connectivity options. Wireless LAN (WLAN) has surpassed
traditional wired LAN in terms of popularity, but wired LAN remains the more secure and reliable
option. Wired LANs use physical cables, like Ethernet, and switches; WLANs use devices, like
wireless routers and access points, to interconnect network devices through radio frequency
waves.
Network administrators can implement security protocols and encryption standards to secure
wireless networks. Wired LANs are usually more secure because they require a physical cable to
2. Local area network
form a connection and are far less susceptible to compromise.
LAN benefits
Resource sharing. Resource sharing is one of the most important reasons for setting up any
network. As more devices connect to each other, they can share more files, data and software
among each other.
Secure data storage. Network data is stored in a centralized location that all connected devices
can access. Devices must receive permission to access the network, preventing unauthorized
users from retrieving sensitive information.
Fast communication. Ethernet cables provide fast, reliable data transmission speeds, which
increase the rate of communication between devices.
Seamless communication. Any authorized user can communicate with another on the same
network.
LAN use cases
LANs support home offices and corporate network environments, among others. Users in personal
home offices can connect their devices and transfer data between each device with little error.
Employees in company offices can quickly communicate, share and access the same data and
services provided by their organization.
The most common WLAN use case is Wi-Fi. A wireless network can use Wi-Fi radio signals to
connect multiple devices in a single location. It's important to note, though, that WLAN and Wi-Fi
differ. A Wi-Fi network is a WLAN, but not all WLANs use Wi-Fi.
Virtual LANs
A virtual LAN (VLAN) is a type of LAN configuration that virtually groups network components into
segments. Network administrators create VLANs to operate segments as individual systems,
separate from the rest of the LAN. VLANs prevent network congestion by isolating LAN traffic for
each segment, in turn improving network performance and efficiency, simplifying network
management and increasing security.
A metropolitan area network (MAN) is an interconnection of several LANs throughout a city, town
or municipality. Like LANs, a MAN can use various wired or wireless connectivity options, including
fiber optics, Ethernet cables, Wi-Fi or cellular.
MAN benefits
Municipal coverage. A MAN can span an entire city or town, stretching network connectivity by
dozens of miles.
Efficient networking standards. MAN configurations typically use IEEE 802.11 networking
standards to increase bandwidth capacity and frequency levels, which boost network
performance.
3. Metropolitan area network
High-speed connectivity. Fiber optic cables are the most popular form of MAN connectivity
because they provide safe and fast connection data rates.
MAN use cases
The main purpose of a MAN is to have the same network available in several locations. In a LAN,
the network is accessible in one location. In a MAN, organizations with LANs in the same
municipality -- such as different office buildings -- can extend their network connectivity to those
different locations.
Government entities may also configure a MAN to provide public network connectivity to users. An
example of this is when municipalities offer free, public Wi-Fi to city residents using wireless MAN
technology.
A campus network, sometimes referred to as a campus area network or CAN, is a network of
interconnected, dispersed LANs. Like MANs, campus networks extend coverage to buildings close
in proximity. The difference between the two configurations is that campus networks connect LANs
within a limited geographical area, while MANs connect LANs within a larger metro area. The
geographical range of a campus network varies from 1 kilometer to 5 km, while MANs can extend
to 50 km.
Campus benefits
Affordability. Campus networks cover a smaller geographical area than MANs, so infrastructure
costs less to maintain.
Easy configuration. Compared to MANs, campus networks are easier to set up and manage
because there is less ground to cover and fewer devices to support.
Wi-Fi hotspot creation. Universities and other organizations with campus networks may set up
free Wi-Fi hotspots in areas with high volume to enable easy network access.
Campus use cases
Network administrators commonly set up campus networks to create networks large enough to
cover a school or university. The term campus network might imply that these networks work only
for university environments, but businesses also set up campus networks to distribute one
standardized network across buildings in a localized area.
4. Campus network
A wide area network (WAN) is the most expansive type of computer network configuration. Like a
MAN, a WAN is a connection of multiple LANs belonging to the same network. Unlike MANs,
however, WANs aren't restricted to the confines of city limits. A WAN can extend to any area of the
globe. For example, an organization with a corporate office in New York can connect a branch
location in London in the same WAN. Users in both locations obtain access to the same data, files
and applications, and can communicate with each other.
WAN benefits
Large area coverage. WANs provide more expansive connectivity because networks can
connect from anywhere in the world.
Improved performance. WANs use links with dedicated bandwidth to connect LANs together.
These links enhance network speeds and provide faster data transfer rates than LANs.
Increased security. Dedicated links also increase safety across the network because the
network only connects to itself, lowering the chances for hackers to hijack a system.
WAN use cases
The main draw of a WAN is its facilitation of long-distance network connectivity. Organizations use
WANs to connect branch offices located away from headquarters. But businesses aren't the only
ones that can use WANs; an estimated two-thirds of the global population uses the internet -- the
world's most popular and largest WAN -- today.
Chart comparing PANs, LANs, MANs, campus networks, WANs, CDNs and VPNs
5. Wide area network
k This table compares the similarities and differences among different network types.
A content delivery network (CDN) is a network of globally distributed servers that deliver dynamic
multimedia content -- such as interactive ads or video content -- to web-based internet users. CDNs
use specialized servers that deliver bandwidth-heavy rich media content by caching it and speeding
up delivery time. CDN providers deploy these digitized servers globally at a network edge, creating
geographically distributed points of presence.
When a user requests data in a network, a proxy server forwards the data to the nearest CDN
server, which encrypts it into a smaller, more manageable file for the network to handle, before
delivering it to the origin server. An origin server provides the content to the user.
CDNs are fairly simple to configure, and organizations have many CDN vendor options from which
to purchase services.
CDN benefits
Fast content delivery. The main goal of a CDN is to load rich media content on websites quickly
and reduce latency between requests.
Increased security. When traffic travels through a CDN server, potential viruses attached to data
reroute to the server, too. A CDN service mitigates these threats so it can send uncompromised
data through the network.
Improved site performance. Websites managed by CDNs experience less latency and
bandwidth limitation issues. Network downtime caused by traffic spikes is also a rare
occurrence in websites with CDNs.
CDN use cases
CDNs enable the delivery of rich -- i.e., dynamic -- media. Most websites and applications
incorporate some form of dynamic content, from embedded social media posts to video-streaming
players. CDNs are more important than ever for accommodating the vast amount of complex data
shared among millions of internet users each day.
A virtual private network (VPN) creates a private network overlay across an existing public network.
VPNs use tunneling protocols that create encrypted connections between the network and client
devices. Network traffic travels over the VPN service's secure, encrypted tunnels instead of a public
network, effectively hiding a user's IP address and data from ISPs and cybersecurity hackers. The
user's location appears to be wherever the VPN server exists.
VPN benefits
Privacy and anonymity. Users can browse a network without having their activity monitored by
an ISP.
Increased security. Users must receive authentication before gaining access to a VPN.
Organizations can secure company data this way by preventing unauthenticated users from
accessing sensitive information.
6. Content delivery network
7. Virtual private network
Geo-spoofing. Users connected to VPNs appear to be in the same location as the server,
whether in an office building or another country entirely. Users can retrieve company data or
gain access to geo-blocked content outside of their country's borders.
VPN use cases
Studies show that VPNs have risen in popularity in recent years as internet users seek to browse
the web without surveillance from their ISPs. An ISP can monitor a user's web activity, including
sites visited and the types of content downloaded. VPNs hide this information from an ISP, while
still providing the user with access to the network service.
VPNs also facilitate remote work for individuals working outside of office locations. User devices
with VPN client software can connect to their organization's VPN server and receive access to their
office's data center. Using that connection, they can access the same files and resources as
employees who are physically located in the building. This functionality made VPN a vital tool
during the COVID-19 pandemic, when more than a third of the U.S. labor force worked from home,
per Pew Research Center.
Several network types, associated topologies and methods of connectivity exist -- even beyond this
guide. A network professional learning to design a network might wonder which design is the best
fit. The simple answer: There isn't one. Choosing which type of network to configure largely
depends on the purpose of the system.
Before network professionals decide which type of network to configure, they should first ask a
series of questions about the system. Determining the use case of the network, the types of users
and devices the network will serve, and the location of the network will help with the process of
selecting the network type and connectivity to deploy.