Q1. Explain the different methods of representation related to counting.

1. Bar Chart

The classic bar chart, or bar graph, is another common and easy-to-use method of data visualization. In this type of visualization, one axis of the chart shows the categories being compared, and the other, a measured value. The length of the bar indicates how each group measures according to the value.

One drawback is that labeling and clarity can become problematic when there are too many categories included. Like pie charts, they can also be too simple for more complex data sets.

2. Histogram

Unlike bar charts, histograms illustrate the distribution of data over a continuous interval or defined period. These visualizations are helpful in identifying where values are concentrated, as well as where there are gaps or unusual values.

Histograms are especially useful for showing the frequency of a particular occurrence. For instance, if you’d like to show how many clicks your website received each day over the last week, you can use a histogram. From this visualization, you can quickly determine which days your website saw the greatest and fewest number of clicks.

Q2. Explain the different forms of uncertainty.

Ranges
which at the least is to show a range or confidence interval. A point in the middle represents a mean or median, and a bar or line shows other possible values or coverage.

Pros
Lines or bars represent a range of values, so you can see that a mean or median represents only part of an estimate. The range is especially useful when you compare multiple estimates, because you can see overlap between categories. You don’t get this from means.

Cons
If you have a full distribution of values, you don’t get to see all of the details in the data. Also, a lot of people don’t understand the concept of confidence intervals or what standard error bars are, so you need to explain clearly with annotation.

Examples
FiveThirtyEight often does a good job at valuing uncertainty in their work. In their basketball player ratings and projections, they show range with light gray bars behind a black dot to represent possible player impact over time.

Distributions
Show the spread of possible values with a histogram or a variant of it. You might see something a median would never show.



Pros
By showing the variation in a sample, you or a reader can make a more educated judgement about whether a sample is trustworthy. It is oddly skewed? Are there multiple peaks? Or is it an expected bell curve?

Cons
Again, many people don’t understand distributions, so you need to explain what’s going on. Sometimes variation is just noise, or the details might obscure the forest for the trees.

Examples
There’s a ton of variance when people experience a “first” in their relationship lives, so instead of just average ages, I used distributions.

Multiple Outcomes
When it comes to projections and forecasts, it is helpful to see various outcomes to see what might happen. Key word: might.



Pros
Uncertainty is displayed more explicitly. People can see that there is no set path, and instead they see a bunch of possible paths.

Cons
If there’s too much noise or there are too many possibilities, the chart might not provide anything of use. But that might be a problem with the forecasting more than the chart choice.

Examples
To show simulation uncertainty for the election, The Upshot displayed multiple delegate outcomes at the same time using various models.

Q3. Explain the p values/significance test.


The p value is a number, calculated from a statistical test, that describes how likely you are to have found a particular set of observations if the null hypothesis were true.

P values are used in hypothesis testing to help decide whether to reject the null hypothesis. The smaller the p value, the more likely you are to reject the null hypothesis.

The p value, or probability value, tells you how likely it is that your data could have occurred under the null hypothesis. It does this by calculating the likelihood of your test statistic, which is the number calculated by a statistical test using your data.

The p value tells you how often you would expect to see a test statistic as extreme or more extreme than the one calculated by your statistical test if the null hypothesis of that test was true. The p value gets smaller as the test statistic calculated from your data gets further away from the range of test statistics predicted by the null hypothesis.

The p value is a proportion: if your p value is 0.05, that means that 5% of the time you would see a test statistic at least as extreme as the one you found if the null hypothesis was true.

Example: Null and alternative hypothesis
You want to know whether there is a difference in longevity between two groups of mice fed on different diets, diet A and diet B. You can statistically test the difference between these two diets using a two-tailed t test.
Null hypothesis (H0): there is no difference in longevity between the two groups.
Alternative hypothesis (HA or H1): there is a difference in longevity between the two groups.

Example: Test statistic and p value
If the mice live equally long on either diet, then the test statistic from your t test will closely match the test statistic from the null hypothesis (that there is no difference between groups), and the resulting p value will be close to 1. It likely won’t reach exactly 1, because in real life the groups will probably not be perfectly equal.

Q4. Explain the importance of sampling.

Statistical Sampling is the process of selecting a small subsets called the sampling units or units from the target population. There are two types of sampling methods:

Probability Sampling: In this method, we are able to select set of distinct samples, assign them different probabilities and use a method to estimate the sample characteristics that can make statistical inferences about the target population. 
Non- Probability Sampling: This type of sampling has no element of random selection involved i.e. their selection is usually based on convenience, accessibility or other criteria. However, these methods lacks flexibility i.e. if a method appears to do well in one comparison, this does not guarantee that it will do well under different circumstances.  

Sampling Terminologies

Population (N): The group or the target audience that you want to draw conclusions.
Sample: The specific group randomly selected that you draw analogies from.
Sampling Units or Units (n): The population is initially divided into various parts called Sampling Units which covers whole of the population and must not overlap. 
Frame: The construction of list of sampling units are called a frame.
Sample Size: The rough estimation of the size of the sample can be made from the knowledge of the degree of precision required.

Lower sampling cost: Sampling reduces the overall cost involved in doing research.
Less time consuming: Sampling reduces the overall time by reducing the size of population.
Higher accuracy of data: A sample represents the whole population from which it is drawn.
Higher scope of sampling: Sampling enables investigators to easily arrive at generalizations about set of data.
Convenience: Sampling ensures convenience.

Q5. Explain standard error of mean.

The standard error of the mean indicates how different the population mean is likely to be from a sample mean.

You can decrease the standard error by increasing the sample size.

Standard error of the mean and standard deviation are both measures of variability used to summarize sets of data

The standard error of the mean (SEM) is used to determine the differences between more than one sample of data. It helps you estimate how well your sample data represents the whole population by measuring the accuracy with which the sample data represents a population using standard deviation. 

A high standard error shows that sample means are widely spread around the population mean, so your sample may not closely represent your population. A low standard error shows that sample means are closely distributed around the population mean, which means that your sample is representative of your population. You can decrease standard error by increasing sample size.

For example, if you measure the weight of a large sample of men, their weights could range from 125 to over 300 pounds. However, if you look at the mean of the sample data, the samples will only vary by a few pounds. You can then use the standard error of the mean to determine how much the weight varies from the mean.

Q6. Write short notes on student T test.

In the area of statistics, a student's t-test is mentioned as a method of testing the theory about the mean of a small sample drawn from a normally distributed population where the standard deviation of the given population is unknown. 

We can define the Student t-test as a method that tells you how significant the differences can be between different groups. A Student t-test is defined as a statistic and this is used to compare the means of two different populations. 

It is a method that is often used in hypothesis testing to find out whether a process or whether a given treatment actually has any effect on the population of interest, or whether or not two populations are different from each other. You wish to know whether the mean petal length of iris flowers differs according to their distinct species. You find two different species of iris flowers growing in a garden and they measure 25 petals of each species. You can test the difference between these two groups with the help of the Student t-test.

The null hypothesis (H0) is one that tells the true difference between these groups.

The alternate hypothesis (Ha) is one that tells the true difference is different from zero.


Student t Test Introduction
In the year 1908, an Englishman named William Sealy Gosset developed the t-test as well as t distribution. (Gosset worked at the Guinness brewery in Dublin and found which existing statistical techniques using large samples were not useful for the small sample sizes which he encountered in his work).

The t distribution belonging under a family of curves in which the number of degrees of freedom specifies a particular curve. As the sample size (and the degrees of freedom) increases, the t distribution approaches the bell shape of the standard normal distribution. In common, for tests involving the mean of a sample of size greater than 30, then the normal distribution is applied.

One-Sample, Two-Sample, or Paired t-Test?
If the groups are coming from a single population (e.g. measuring after and before an experimental treatment), perform a paired t-test.

If the groups are coming from two different populations (e.g. people from two separate cities), perform a two-sample t-test (also known as independent t-test).

If there is a group being compared against any standard value (e.g. comparing the acidity of any liquid to a neutral pH of 7), perform a one-sample t-test.

A larger t-value denotes the difference between group means is greater than the pooled standard error, indicating a more significant difference between the groups.

You can compare your calculated t-value against the values in a critical value chart to determine whether your t-value is greater than what would be expected by chance. If so, you can reject the null hypothesis and you can conclude which two groups are in fact different.


Uses of Student t Test

Student t test Example: Let’s say you are suffering from a cold and you try a naturopathic remedy. Your cold lasts for a couple of days. The next time you have a cold, you buy an over-the-counter pharmaceutical and the cold lasts a week. You survey your friends and ask which of their colds were of shorter duration when they took the homoeopathic remedy. What you really want to know is, are the results repeatable? A t-test will help you by comparing the means of the two groups and let you know the probability of it happening.

In real life, student’s t-tests can be used to compare averages. For example, a drug company may want to test a new cancer drug to find out if it improves life expectancy or not. In an experiment, there’s always a control group (which is basically a group who are given a placebo, or “sugar pill”). The control group may show an average life expectancy of 5 plus years, while the group taking the new drug might have a life expectancy of 6 plus years. It would seem which drug might work. But it could be due to a fluke. To test this, a student’s t-test can be used to find out if the results are repeatable for an entire population.


